Ankerite Ca(Mg, Fe2+, Mn)(CO3)2

Stage 1:
Colour: White/Yellowish white.
Abundance: Frequently fills joints in coal seams.
Hardness: 3.5 - 4 (Soft - Medium).
Lustre: Vitreous to pearly.
Ore: Gangue mineral accompanying iron ore.
Interesting fact: Darkens with heating and may become magnetic.

Stage 2:
Uses: Minor iron ore.
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: N/A.
Crystal Habit: Rhombohedral with curved faces, columnar, granular, massive.
Crystal Structure: Trigonal.
Depositional Environment: Result of both hydrothermal, low-temperature metasomatism and banded iron formations.
Transparency: Translucent - transparent.
Origin of Name: Named after M. J. Anker, an Austrian mineralogist .
Colours Observed at Killhope: Cream, brown.

Stage 3:
Further uses: None.
Streak: White.
Cleavage: Perfect.
Fracture: Subconchoidal.

Stage 4: 
Specific Gravity: 2.93 - 3.10.
Further properties: Colour turns yellowish brown/brown when oxidation of iron has occured.
Relevance at Killhope: Large concentration of ankerite accompany galena-sphalerite-fluorite-baryte veins such as in the North Pennines orefield where limestone or quartz dolerite has been replaced.
Optical Properties: 
Increasing replacement of Mg by Fe2+ increases the refractive indices, birefringence and specific gravity.

Aragonite - CaCO3

1st Stage
Colour: It can be white, colourless, grey, yellowish, reddish and green.
Abundance: Extremely common on the seafloor as it forms in almost all mollusk shells, and as the calcareous endoskeleton of warm and cold water corals.
Hardness: 3 - 3.5 (soft to medium).
Lustre: Vitreous inclining to resinous.
Interesting Fact: Aragonite is considered essential for the replication of reef conditions in aquariums. It is the material that sea life is evolved to use and live around and also keeps the tank's pH close to its natural level.

2nd Stage
Uses: Aquariums, gemstones.
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: Facet-quality crystals come from the Czech Republic, superb cave growths from Mexico and flos-ferri from Austria and Greece.
Crystal Habit: Prismatic, acicular, columnar or fibrous. Occasionally in branching stalactitic forms called “flos-ferri” meaning “flowers of iron” due to their association with ores at Carinthian iron mines.
Crystal Structure: Orthorhombic.
Depositional Environment: Sedimentary formations and evaporite deposits, hot spring deposits, hydrothermal ore veins, igneous traprock environments, and metamorphic schists. 
Transparency: Transparent to translucent.
Origin of Name: The type location for aragonite is Molina de Aragón (Guadalajara, Spain), 25 km from Aragon for which it was named in 1797.
Colour Observed at Killhope: White.

3rd Stage
Further Uses: Layered aragonite is sometimes polished and sold as ‘onyx’.
Streak: White.
Cleavage: Distinct.
Fracture: Subconchoidal.

4th Stage
Specific Gravity: 4.3.
Relevance at Killhope: Often found with iron ores and used in spar boxes.
Optical Properties: Biaxial.
Impurities: Various impurities lead to the vast selection of colours described.

Baryte - BaSO4

1st stage:
Colour: White, often tinged with yellow, brown, blue, green or red.
Abundance: Found worldwide.
Hardness: 2 - 3 (brittle).
Lustre: Vitreous.
Interesting fact: It will glow green, blue or yellow under ultraviolet light.


2nd stage:
Uses: A component of heavy cement, it is crushed and screened to a uniform size. 
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: China, India, USA, Morocco, Turkey and Kazakhstan. 
Crystal Habit: Tabular, with a prismatic habit giving the diamond-shaped outline with fibrous, coxcomb, granular and stalagmitic habits also being associated with this mineral.
Crystal Structure: Orthorhombic.
Depositional Environment : It is deposited during evaporation and biogenic processes and as a vein filling gangue mineral, as well as being identified in meteorites.
Transparency: Transparent to translucent.
Origin of Name: Derived from the Greek word βαρύς meaning heavy.
Colours Observed at Killhope: White, brown and yellow.


3rd stage:
Further Uses: Varies the weight of well drilling mud in the production of petroleum which helps eliminate large differences in pressure between it, and the hydrocarbons, preventing kicks and subsequent catastrophic blow outs such as the incident in the Gulf of Mexico.
Streak: White.
Cleavage: Well observed, displaying perfect basal, and very good prismatic cleavage.
Fracture: Uneven.

4th stage:
Specific Gravity: 4.3 - 4.6.
Further Properties: In the deep oceans, baryte crystallises out and forms a significant amount of sediments. With oxygen forming part of the crystal structure, we can use it to gather paleotemperatures to a maximum of 25 Ma in conjunction with the  δ18O values. Similar variations of sulphur are also being exploited.
Relevance at Killhope: Deposition is associated with galena.
Optical Properties: Biaxial positive.

Impurities: Yellow, red and brown caused by iron oxides, hydroxides, sulphides and organic matter whilst blue colours indicate exposure of radiation.

Barytocalcite - BaCa(CO3)

Stage 1:
Colour: White, greyish, yellow/brownish. 
Abundance: Forms orientated druzy growths on baryte and calcite.
Hardness: 4 (Medium).
Lustre: Vitreous to resinous.
Ore: Minor ore of barium.
Interesting fact: Type locality is the Blagill Mine in the North Pennines. In the past lustrous, transparent, prismatic crystals of Barytocalcite have been found there.

Stage 2:
Uses: Minor ore of barium.
Principal localities: England, Canada, Russia, USA .
Crystal Habit: Prismatic.
Crystal Structure: Monoclinic.
Depositional Environment: Forms in hydrothermal veins, especially where hydrothermal solutions have invaded limestone.
Transparency: Transparent to translucent.
Origin of Name: Derives its name from its components: barium and calcite.
Colours Observed at Killhope: Brown, yellow/brown, honey, white.

Stage 3:
Further uses: None.
Streak: White.
Cleavage: Perfect, imperfect.
Fracture: Uneven, brittle.

Stage 4: 
Specific Gravity: 3.7.
Further properties: Soluble in dilute HCl.
Relevance at Killhope: It was first described in 1824 for an occurrence in the Blagill Mine in North Pennines.
Optical Properties: Biaxial mineral.


Calcite - CaCO3

1st stage:
Colour: Usually colourless or white but shades of grey, yellow, green, red, purple, blue and even brown or black.
Abundance: It is found in virtually every country as a major constituent in calcareous sedimentary rocks such as limestone and its metamorphic equivalent (marble).
Hardness: 3 (medium to soft).
Lustre: Vitreous or pearly.
Interesting fact: Calcite refracts light, making you see two images instead of one.

2nd stage:
Uses (past and present): Fabricating optical sights on weapons for World War II. Construction material, abrasive, agricultural soil treatment, construction aggregate, pigment, pharmaceuticals and more. It has more uses than almost any other mineral. 
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: Stalagmites and stalactites are defining characteristics of limestone caverns which are found worldwide, particularly within tropical regions with the more well known ones recognised in Borneo, Iceland and Mexico. Salt rich bodies of water which dry up known as playa lakes or salt flats such as the World’s largest in Bolivia, are large sources of calcite.
Crystal Habit: Varies more than any other mineral, most common being tabular and prismatic with fibrous, granular, stalactic or massive habits also observed.
Crystal Structure: Trigonal.
Depositional Environment: Hydrothermal veins and vugs, such as here in Weardale as well as caverns and marine organisms. 
Transparency: Translucent to transparent.
Origin of Name: Derived from the greek word ‘Chalix’ meaning lime.
Colours Observed at Killhope: White and brown.

3rd stage:
Streak: White.
Cleavage: Perfect rhombohedral.
Fracture: Conchoidal fracture but rarely seen due to the perfect cleavage.

4th stage:
Specific Gravity: 2.7.
Further Properties: The phenomenon of double refraction causes a single dot on a piece of paper display 2 dots. If rotated, the true dot is stationary with the other rotating to the rhomb. It’s variable habit indicates the depositional temperature conditions.
Relevance at Killhope: Gangue mineral, and used in spar boxes.
Optical Properties: Uniaxial, very common twinning, with lamellar twinning occurring due to exposure of high pressures.

Impurities: Red due to iron while purple and blue indicate levels of niobium and brown or black include manganese.

Cerussite - (PbCO3)

Stage 1
Colour: Usually white or grey but sometimes gray, blue, or green.
Abundance: Namibia is perhaps the most classic locality for this mineral. Finer examples found in Morocco with excellent specimens from Australia, Italy, Weardale and Cornwall.
Hardness: 3 - 3.5 (brittle).
Lustre: Adamantine.
Ore: Lead and sometimes silver.
Interesting fact: Breaks down to a basic carbonate at about 300°, which, in turn, decomposes to lead oxide at about 500°.

Stage 2
Uses: See uses for galena.
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: Along with the localities listed previously, it also occurs in North and South America and Australia where it has been mined.
Crystal Habit: Massive granular, reticulate, tabular to equant crystals.
Crystal Structure: Orthorhombic.
Depositional Environment: Occurs as a secondary mineral in oxidised lead veins.
Transparency: Transparent to translucent.
Origin of Name: From the latin name ‘cerussa’ meaning white lead.
Colours Observed at Killhope: White, brown, blue and green.

Stage 3
Further uses: Cerussite was once used as a white pigment.
Streak: White.
Cleavage: Prismatic in two directions.
Fracture: Conchoidal.

Stage 4
Specific Gravity: 6.4 - 6.6. 
Relevance at Killhope: An ore of lead and silver.
Optical Properties: Biaxial with common contact or penetration twins.

Impurities: Blue and green colours typically indicate traces of copper.

Fluorite - CaF2 (Calcium Fluoride) [also known as Fluorspar]

Stage 1:
Common Colours: Purple varieties, blue, green, yellow, colourless.
Abundance: Widely distributed occurring in veins either alone or as a gangue mineral with metallic ores.
Hardness: 4 (Medium).
Lustre: Vitreous.
Ore: None.
Interesting fact: Many samples exhibit fluorescence under ultraviolet light - a property that takes its name from fluorite.

Stage 2:
Uses: 
-	Metallurgical grade fluorite (60-85% CaF2) used as a flux to lower the melting point in steel production and to decrease the viscosity of slags. Later used in the production of aluminium to remove impurities.
-	Ceramic grade fluorite (85-95% CaF2) used in the production of opalescent glass, enamels and cooking utensils.
-	Acid grade fluorite (>95%) used to make hydrogen fluoride and hydrofluoric acid - accounts for 95% of fluorite consumption in the USA.
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: China, Mexico, Mongolia, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Namibia. 
Crystal Habit: Well formed, coarse sized crystals.
Crystal Structure: Cubic.
Depositional Environment: Vein deposits, often forms a part of the gangue.
Transparency: Transparent to translucent.
Origin of Name: Derived from the Latin fluo, in allusion to its readily fusible nature and its commercial use as a flux in smelting.
Colours Observed at Killhope: Brown, purple, violet, blue, green, colourless, grey, amber, white.

Stage 3:
Further uses: 
-	Ornamental and lapidary uses. Although not widely used as a semi-precious stone due to its softness.
-	Commonly used as a window material for infrared and ultraviolet wavelengths in laboratories.
Streak: White.
Cleavage: Octahedral.
Fracture: Subconchoidal to Uneven.

Stage 4: 
Specific Gravity: 3.18.
Further properties: 
Calcium ions are arranged on a cubic fluorine lattice, a  calcium ion is located at the centre of each cube face and each corner. 

(Image from geology.com)



Galena - PbS (Lead (II) Sulfide)

1st stage
Colour: Lead-grey.
Abundance: Galena is found worldwide in a variety of different geologic environments due to its formation in low, intermediate and high temperature environments.
Hardness: 2.5 (soft).
Lustre: Metallic, however specimens tarnish when exposed to air becoming dull.
Ore: Most abundant lead ore.
Interesting fact: The smelting of Galena can be achieved by nothing more complex than heating galena in the embers of a campfire and retrieving the metal from beneath when it cools.

2nd stage:
Uses: In ancient times lead was widely used for everything from water pipes to cooking pots, however due to our knowledge of its toxic and carcinogenic properties, its applications have been limited. Lead still has many uses in the modern world, from car batteries to the lining of roofs.
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: Galena is a fairly common mineral and occurs in numerous locations worldwide. Galena is mined in Germany, Kosovo, Romania , and the U.S. tri-state mining district of Kansas, Missouri and Oklahoma.
Crystal Habit: Fully grown crystals can be either coarse or fine grained and more rarely fibrous, crystals exceeding 2.5cm are common.
Crystal Structure: Cubic and octahedral crystal systems, although the latter is rarely present alone. These crystals often grow on top of one another.
Depositional Environment: In sedimentary limestone deposits, hydrothermal veins, hydrothermal replacement deposits, and in placer deposits. Rarely associated with basalts and diabase. 
Transparency: Opaque
Origin of name: Named by Pliny the Elder in 77-79 from the Greek "galene" meaning lead ore.
Colour seen at Killhope: Lead-grey.

3rd stage:
Further information on its uses: One of its oldest known uses was in Ancient Egypt where Egyptians would smear galena around their eyes to reflect sunlight and repel disease carrying insects. In many cases, galena contains impurities such as Copper, Zinc, Bismuth and Silver. 
Often Galena can be made up of 1-2% silver, and this can be of greater value than the lead content making it also an important source of silver.
Streak: Lead-grey.
Cleavage: Often exhibits a perfect cubic cleavage with abundant triangular pits. This results in it deforming along it’s cube planes.
Fracture: Subconchoidal.

4th stage:
Specific gravity: 7.4 - 7.6 (Very high density).
Further Structural Information: Galena belongs to the octahedral sulfide group of minerals with metal ions in octahedral positions - 6 points, creating 8 faces.
Alteration Properties: Within the weathering or oxidation zone galena alters to anglesite (lead sulfate), cerussite (lead carbonate), pyromorphite and pseudomorphs, which include chalcocite and covellite and can create overgrowths on one another.
Isotopic information: The ratios of lead isotopes (206Pb, 207Pb and 208Pb) in Galena specimens allows the ages of the rock it is found in to be calculated.
Associated Minerals: Galena often forms along side other minerals, in particular baryte, fluorite, quartz and calcite.
Relevance at Killhope: Excellent Galena occurs in several places in England; the best include Alston Moor and Weardale, where it forms together with Fluorite. 
Optical Properties: Optically isotropic, it reflects 42% of all light exposed to its surface.
Impurities: Can include many different impurities including silver, arsenic, antimony, and copper.

Limonite (FeO.OH.nH2O)

Stage 1: 
Colour: Yellow/Brown. 
Abundance: Extremely common.
Hardness: 4 - 5.5 (Medium).
Lustre: Earthy.
Ore: Iron.
Interesting fact: Although originally defined as a single mineral, no longer scientifically considered a true mineral as it lacks a definitive chemical formula and crystal structure.  Formula found to be a mixture of different minerals. Limonite is now considered a field term to describe hydrated oxides of iron with poorly crystalline character whose identity has not yet been determined.

Stage 2:
Uses: One of two primary iron ores (along side Hematite).
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: USA (since ceased), Spain, Brazil, Australia.
Crystal Habit: Fine grained aggregate.
Crystal Structure: Amorphous.
Depositional Environment: Common as a biogenic precipitate in swamps or as microscopic particles staining other minerals in weathered outcrops of metalliferous veins.
Transparency: Opaque.
Origin of Name: Named from the Greek word λειμών, meaning meadow, in allusion to its occurrence as a bog iron ore.
Colours Observed at Killhope: Brown, orange/brown.

Stage 3:
Further uses: As a pigment.
Streak: Yellowish brown.
Cleavage: Absent.
Fracture: Uneven.

Stage 4: 
Specific Gravity: 2.7 - 4.3.
Further properties: 
Commonly a product of iron-bearing minerals but can be found in all rocks.
Mixture of related hydrated iron oxide minerals, chief mineralogical component is goethite. Individual minerals in limonite may form crystals but limonite does not, although it may show a fibrous or microcrystalline structure.
Limonite pseudomorphs can form through chemical weathering, transforming crystals of iron oxides, in particular pyrite, into limonite by hydrating the molecules, although the external shape remains that of the original mineral.
Relevance at Killhope: Occurs as pseudomorphs of iron oxides in the North Pennine orefield.
Optical Properties: Normally isotropic but may allow anomalous birefringence. 
Twinning: Common, often as interpenetrate cubes.
Soluble in H2SO4.
Relevance at Killhope: 
In the North Pennine fluorite zone, purple and green fluorite occurs towards the centre while yellow is found towards the outer portions.
Deposition temperatures of 90-220°C in the North Pennines calculated from studies on primary fluid inclusions in hydrothermal fluorite.
Optical Properties: 
Much discussion in cause of range of colours in fluorite. Theories include element impurities (allochromatic), physical disturbances in the crystal structure, radioactive inclusions, traces of rare earth elements, presence of inclusions of carbonaceous material and emissions from nearby radioactive sources. In reality, the wide variety of colours illustrated by fluorite can probably be affiliated to all of these factors.




Quartz - SiO2

1st Stage
Colour: Most often seen in its colourless or milky white form, although it can also occur in many different coloured varieties.
Abundance: After Silica, Quartz is the most abundant mineral in the Earth’s Crust. Quartz occurs in nearly all silica-rich metamorphic, sedimentary, and igneous rocks.
Hardness: 7 (very hard, can only be scratched with metals such as tungsten). 
Lustre: Vitreous.
Interesting fact: Quartz was the mineral upon which the Stone Ages were based. With few exceptions, most early stone tools were fashioned of quartz. 

2nd Stage
Uses: Quartz sand is often used in glass making. Quartz is also used as a gemstone as it is hard, durable, easy to shape and usually accepts a brilliant polish.
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: United States (Arkansas), India, Brazil and Madagascar.
Crystal Habit: Prismatic. Two forms - crystalline and cryptocrystalline (formed of microscopic crystalline particles).
Crystal Structure: Hexagonal/Trigonal.
Depositional Environment: Occurs in virtually every mineral environment, often precipitating out of hydrothermal fluid.
Transparency: Transparent.
Origin of Name: The word Quartz comes from the German Quarz which is of Slavic origin (Czech miners called it křemen). Other sources attribute the word’s origin to the Saxon word Querkluftertz meaning cross-vein ore.
Colours seen at Killhope: White, yellow.

3rd Stage
Further Uses: All forms of quartz are used as gemstones, and they are all affordable. They are cut into various gemstone cuts and cabochons, and used in all forms of jewellry. Lesser quality stones are often tumbled for use in bracelets, necklaces, and as costume jewellry. Large spheres and carvings are also cut from all the quartz forms.  
Streak: White.
Cleavage: None.
Fracture: Conchoidal.

4th Stage
Specific Gravity: 2.7
Relevance at Killhope: Gangue mineral and used in spar boxes.
Optical Properties: Uniaxial whilst showing a substantial variation of extinctions including the most reputable undulose extinction. Simple and lamellae twinning can occur.
Impurities: Smoky quartz - light brown, Milky quartz - white to greyish white, Rose quartz - translucent or transparent pink, Citrine - yellow to brownish quartz, Amethyst - vitreous quartz with purple, violet or red-purple colouration.

Siderite - FeCO3

1st Stage
Colour: Yellowish to dark brown.
Abundance: Widespread - found in sedimentary, igneous and metamorphic rocks.
Hardness: 3.5/4 (medium).
Lustre: Vitreous to pearly. 
Ore: One of the iron carbonates (iron ore).
Interesting fact: It is a valuable iron mineral, since it is 48% iron and contains no sulfur or phosphorus.

2nd Stage
Uses: Siderites main use is for iron smelting, and it is a local but not a major source of iron.
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: Iron is produced widely across the globe.
Crystal Habit: Rhombohedral - Tabular crystals, often curved - botryoidal to massive.
Crystal Structure: Hexagonal/Trigonal.
Depositional Environment: Well-formed crystals are usually found in hydrothermal veins. In sedimentary rocks it occurs at shallow burial depths as concretions and in thin beds with shale, clay, and coal seams. Well-formed crystals can also be found in some granitic and syenitic pegmatites.
Transparency: Translucent.
Origin of Name: It takes its name from the Greek word σίδηρος, sideros, meaning “iron”.
Colours Seen at Killhope: Brown to dark brown and green.


3rd Stage
Further Uses: The smelting of iron from ores began in about 2000 BC in Persia. Iron proved a superior metal to bronze in almost every single way, and it’s use ultimately led to the Industrial Revolution. Siderite’s contribution as an ore for iron has not yet been fully determined.
Streak: White.
Cleavage: Perfect, rhombohedral.
Fracture: Uneven or Conchoidal.

4th Stage
Specific Gravity: 3.9.
Relevance at Killhope: Economic value and used in spar boxes.
Optical Properties: Occasional lamellar twinning.

Impurities: Color range from yellow to dark brown or black, the latter being due to the presence of manganese.


Smithsonite ZnCO3

Stage 1
Colour: White, blue, green, yellow, brown, pink, colourless.
Abundance: Fairly common mineral found in the oxidation zone of most zinc deposits.
Hardness: 4 - 4.5 (medium).
Lustre: Vitreous to pearly.
Ore: Zinc.
Interesting fact: First named ‘calamine’, it was renamed when it was discovered both smithsonite and hemimorphite had been grouped under the same name.

Stage 2
Uses: Zinc is used for galvanizing steel, producing brass and bronze as well as zinc base alloys.
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: Significant deposits in Italy, Greece, Namibia, Germany, Mexico, Zambia, US and Australia.
Crystal Habit: Botryoidal or rhombohedral.
Crystal Structure:  Hexagonal or Scalenohedral.
Depositional Environment: Smithsonite occurs as a secondary mineral in the weathering or oxidation zone of zinc-bearing ore deposits. It sometimes occurs as replacement bodies in carbonate rocks.
Transparency: Translucent to opaque.
Origin of Name: Named after James Smithson (1765-1829), English mineralogist who financed the founding of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC, USA.
Colours Observed at Killhope: Yellow/green, grey/brown.

Stage 3
Further uses: Smithsonite is occasionally cut as ornaments and ‘en cabochon’ as gems.
Streak: White.
Cleavage: Perfect rhombohedral.
Fracture: Uneven to Conchoidal.

Stage 4 
Specific Gravity: 4.4 - 4.5.
Further properties: Part of the carbonate group.
Tenacity: Brittle.
Relevance at Killhope: Zinc ore found in the area.
Optical Properties: Perfect cleavage on [1011], no twinning.

Sphalerite - (Zn,Fe)S (Zinc Sulfide)

1st stage
Colour: Typically red, brown/black or yellow.
Abundance: It is found in a multitude of countries Worldwide.
Hardness: 3.5-4 (soft to medium).
Lustre: Typically resinous while opaque specimens exhibit a shiny sub-metallic lustre.
Ore: Zinc.
Interesting Fact: Copper, silver and tin are often recorded in sphalerite.

2nd stage
Uses: Crystals of suitable size and transparency can be fashioned into gemstones.
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: Sphalerite is produced worldwide, such as the Alston Moor, Germany, Switzerland, Canada and North and South America.
Crystal Habit: Tetrahedral or rhombidodecahedron.
Crystal Structure: Cubic.
Depositional Environment: Like Killhope, many deposits form where hydrothermal activity or contact metamorphism has brought hot, acidic, zinc-bearing fluids in contact with carbonate rocks.
Transparency: Pure zinc sphalerites can be colourless and transparent, but iron will decrease translucency and the deepen the colour.
Origin of Name: It takes its name from the Greek word spaleros meaning slippery/deceitful, as it was easily mistaken for galena.
Colour Observed at Killhope: Black.

3rd stage
Further Uses: The amount of iron that be accommodated in the sphalerite structure increases with increasing temperature, therefore it can be used as a geological thermometer. Industrial uses for zinc involve the production of brass and bronze alloys, an anti-corrosive in the galvanising of sheet steel and iron, galvanic elements, pigments such as zinc white, litopone, zinc yellow and in insecticides.
Streak: Brown to light yellow or white streak.
Cleavage: Perfect rhombohedral.
Fracture: Conchoidal

4th stage
Specific Gravity: 3.9 - 4.1.
Further Properties: Pure sphalerite transforms to the wurtzite polymorph at 1020°C if oxidation is prevented, but the inversion temperature is lowered by the presence of iron and manganese. Wurtzite can remain stable under 1020°C but any applied stress will convert it into sphalerite.
Relevance at Killhope: Major economic mineral associated with galena.
Optical Properties: Multiple contact twins, penetration twins  and lamellar intergrowths are common.

Impurities: Green with cobalt and iron, red with tin, indium, silver and molybdenum and yellow often indicating a presence of carbon, copper, mercury, cadmium or germanium.


Witherite ZnCO3

Stage 1
Colour: White, colourless, yellow, brown or green.
Abundance: Rare.
Hardness: 3 - 3.5 (medium soft).
Lustre: Vitreous.
Ore: Ore of the element barium.
Interesting fact: Can be lethal, the 18th-century naturalist Dr. Leigh recorded its lethal effects after the death of a farmer's wife and child after they came into contact with the mineral.

Stage 2
Uses: Witherite has been used for hardening steel, and for making cement, glass, enamelware, soap, dye and explosives.
Main countries involved in the extraction of mineral: Found in commercial quantities in England, France, Turkmenistan and Japan.
Crystal Habit: Striated short prismatic crystals, also botryoidal to spherical.
Crystal Structure: Orthorhombic.
Depositional Environment: Found in low temperature hydrothermal vein deposits.
Transparency: Transparent to translucent.
Origin of Name: Named in 1790 after the mineralogist William Withering.
Colours Observed at Killhope: Brown, grey/white, white/purple.

Stage 3
Further uses: Up until the 18th century farmers at Anglezarke, Lancashire used the mineral as rat poison.
Streak: White.
Cleavage: Distinct, imperfect.
Fracture: Uneven, brittle.

Stage 4
Specific Gravity: 4.3.
Further properties: Part of the aragonite group.
Relevance at Killhope: First recorded on Alston Moor, Northumberland. Found in the surrounding area in hydrothermal vein deposits.
Optical Properties: Crystals often form multiple twins.





